



LAMPS                                                       S. Santesson
Internet-Draft                                           IDsec Solutions
Intended status: Standards Track                         30 October 2025
Expires: 3 May 2026


                       One Signature Certificates
               draft-santesson-one-signature-certs-latest

Abstract

   Electronic signatures based on multipurpose expiring certificates
   that may be revoked introduce many challenges when a signed document
   has to be maintained over time.  Solutions include timestamping,
   storing revocation records and advanced verification procedures.
   This draft introduces a new type of certificates for a key that is
   used and bound to just one signing instance.  The certificate is
   created at the time of signing, and the signature key is destroyed
   after signing is completed.  These certificates never expire and are
   never revoked, which drastically reduce the burden of future
   signature validation.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-santesson-one-signature-
   certs/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/Razumain/one-signature-certs.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 May 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Basic features
       1.1.1.  Revocation
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Certificate content
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  References
     6.1.  Normative References
     6.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The landscape of server-based signing services has changed over the
   last decades.  During the past years one type of signature service
   has gained a lot of traction where the signing key and signing
   certificate are created for each instance of signing, rather than re-
   using a static key and certificate over time.

   Some reasons why this type of signature services has been successful
   are:

   *  The certificate will always have a predictable validity time from
      the time of signing

   *  The time of signing is guaranteed by the certificate issue date

   *  The identity information in the certificate can be adapted to the
      signing context for each instance of signing

   *  Revocation of signing certificates is practically non-existent
      despite many years of operation and millions of signatures.

   *  Service providers are not bound to using the signature service
      where the signer's key and certificate is located, but can choose
      one signature service it integrates with that holds no pre-stored
      user keys and certificates.

   While this type of signature service solves a lot of problems, it
   still suffers from the complexity caused by expiring signing
   certificates.  One solution to this problem is the Signature
   Validation Token (SVT) [RFC9321] where future validation can rely on
   a previous successful validation rather than making a new re-
   validation based on aging data.

   This document takes this one step further and allows future re-
   validation at any time in the future as long as trust in the CA
   certificate can be established.

1.1.  Basic features

   One signature certificates have the following common characteristics:

   *  They never expire

   *  They are never revoked

   *  They are bound to a specific document content

   *  They assert that the corresponding private key was destroyed after
      signing

1.1.1.  Revocation

   Traditional certificates that are re-used over time have many
   legitimate reasons for revocation, such as if the private key is lost
   or compromised.  This can lead to large volumes of revocation data.

   The fact that the same key is used many times exposes the key for the
   risk of unauthorized usage or theft.  When many objects are signed
   with the same key, the risk of exposure and the number of affected
   signed documents upon revocation increases, unless properly
   timestamped and properly verified.

   When a signing key is used only once, that risk of exposure is
   drastically reduced, and it has been shown that most usages of
   dedicated keys and certificates no longer require revocation.

   No CA can guarantee that a certificate is correctly issued.  What the
   CA does is to attest that a certain procedure was followed when the
   certificate was issued, and the certificate itself is an attestation
   that this process was followed successfully when the signature was
   created.  Certificates issued according to this profile therefore
   only attest to the validity at the time of issuance and signing,
   rather than a retroactive state at the time of validation.  This
   profile is intended for those applications where this declaration of
   validity is relevant and useful.

   Applications that require traditional revocation checking that
   provides the state at the time of validation MUST NOT use this
   profile.

   An example usage where this is useful is in services where the signed
   document is stored as an internal evidence record, such as when a Tax
   agency allows citizens to sign their tax declarations.  This record
   is then pulled out and used only in case of a dispute where the
   identified signer challenges the signature.  A revocation service is
   less likely to contribute to this process.  If the challenge is
   successful, the signed document will be removed without affecting any
   other signed documents in the archive.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Certificate content

   Certificates issued according to this profile SHALL meet all
   requirements of this section.

   To indicate that a certificate has no well-defined expiration date,
   the notAfter field SHALL be assigned the GeneralizedTime value
   99991231235959Z, as defined in [RFC5280]

4.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC9321]  Santesson, S. and R. Housley, "Signature Validation
              Token", RFC 9321, DOI 10.17487/RFC9321, October 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9321>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Stefan Santesson
   IDsec Solutions AB
   Forskningsbyn Ideon
   SE-223 70 Lund
   Sweden
   Email: sts@aaa-sec.com
